Preface
#######

..  warning::


    This project is a work in progress. As of Oct 1, I have enough tools
    devleoped to provide a command line application that can analyze the model
    airplanes I am presenting here. If you are visiting this site after reading
    my NFFS Symposium article, please let me know what you think about all of
    this, and what you might like to see added to the tool set.

The |MM| Project
**********************

This project began as an experiment. I wanted to see if I could design an
indoor model airplane using |OSC|_, a popular, free, open-source, 3D modeling
program. As my experiment progressed, it occurred to me that I could go further.
|OSC|_ can generate files suitable for generating 3D printer parts, but that
was not likely to be useful to a model airplane builder. Instead, the files
generated by |OSC|_ can be used to perform an analysis of the mass
properties of a part. Using this data, you can calculate the model weight,
center of gravity location, the geometric bounds of a model, and the mass
moments of inertia, all of which might be useful in performing more detailed
analysis of a model design.

NFFS 2021 Symposium
*******************

About the time this project was producing some interesting results, I spotted a
call for papers for the 2021 |NFFS|_ Symposium, a technical journal for model
builders. I set out to write an article that might be suitable for this
publication, and submitted it as a proposal. It was accepted and is now
available from NFFS_.

However, the publication had constraints that meant that a lot of the material
had to be abbreviated to fit into the journal. Since I have a long history of
generating lecture materials and posting them on web servers, I decided to
generate a much more detailed set of documents to accompany this publication.
All of that material is available here, and future developments will be added
as well.

Analysis Program
****************

In my experiments, I put together snippets of code that performed some of the
analytical steps I envisioned for the design. These experiments were fine for a
programmer, but would not be that useful to the average model builder, even one
who might read the Symposium article. What I needed to do was generate a full
fledged application that could be used by model builders. To keep things
simple, the program would be written in |PY|_ and packaged for distribution on
any platform: PC, Mac, or Linux. I decided to generate a graphical interface to
assist in managing the design process and performing the analysis steps. The
Qt_ graphics library was chosen for this work, and the final application will
be available as a completely self-contained application for all platforms.

The Project Diary
*****************

I am an educator, and i like to explain how things get put together. For that
reason, I am including a development diary in this project, detailing the steps
I took to generate the complete project package: documentation, analysis code,
and test model designs.

Model builders may wish to skip the development material and focus on those
parts that will be useful in building their own designs. For the more technical
folks, the analysis section may prove interesting. I am going to try to add as
much theoretical material as I can to enhance the usefulness of this project in
model design work. Finally, software folks will find the development material
useful, and may inspire them to assist in the further development of this
project.

All of the material produced for this project can be found on my |GH|
account at https://github.com/rblack42/math-magik. The supporting |PY|_
application can be found there as well.

Hopefully this will prove to be useful to the model building community. I owe
much of my professional career to that group of folks, and this is my chance to
pay back something!


Roie R. Black

::

    AMA 18079
    B.S., M.S., Aerospace Engineering, Virginia Tech
    M.S Computer Science, Texas State
    Major, USAF (retired)
    Professor, Computer Science, Austin Community College (retired)

