..  _command-line:

The Command Line
################

You are in for a shock!

We will work using a classical interface to the operating system called the
:term:`command line`. All systems support this kind of interface, and using
this mechanism to control your machine is sometimes needed. When you work on a
remote server, out there in the :term:`cloud`, there is no graphical user
interface available. You have to use the :term:`command line`!

..  note::

    Students in my classes usually show up owning a Windows PC, or maybe a Mac.
    Rarely, they have one running some flavor of Linux. I try to accommodate
    all three kinds of users, so these notes will cover all of these systems.


Here is the command line on my Mac:

..  image:: images/mac-terminal.png
    :align: center


Pretty dull, right? No fancy icons, not much color. The key thing here, is that
everything is text-based. The software needed to create this interface is
extremely simple. For that reason alone, this is the interface of choice for
doing simple text-based tasks on any computer.

Finding the Command Line
************************

Let's launch this new interface:

Windows Command Line
====================

Windows likes to call their interface the "command prompt". You can bring up
this interface by doing this:

    * Click on the "Search" area at the bottom left of your screen

    * Enter "cmd" (without the quotes). The :term:`command prompt` window
      should appear,

..  note::

    You probably will want to "pin" this window's icon on the task bar at the
    bottom of your screen. Right-click on that icon and select "Pin to
    Taskbar". Then, to launch a :term:`command line` window, just click on
    that icon.

Mac Command Line
================

On the Mac, you will open the ``Terminal`` application. Using the ``Finder``
tool, navigate to :menuselection:`Applications -> Utility -> Terminal.app`.
Click on that to start the application.

..  note::

    Follow the guide above to "pin" this icon to the Mac ``Dock``.

Linux Command Line
==================

..  note::

    I use some flavor of Ubuntu_ Linux in this project. If you are
    running some other Linux distribution, consult your user guides (or cheat
    and Google for help).

Assuming you are running the desktop version of Ubuntu_, you can open a
:term:`shell` interface (that is Linux-speak for :term:`command prompt`) by
doing this:

    * Click on the "gear" icon (the Ubuntu_ applications search tool) and type
      in "Term" in the search box. I usually select ``Xterm`` on my systems,
      but there is another simpler ``Terminal`` application as well.

Entering Commands
*****************

In all three cases above, you end up staring at a blank window with some kind
of *prompt* displayed. Typically, the *prompt* is a simple line like these :

..  code-block:: text

    Windows:

        **C:\>**

    Mac/Linux:

        **/Users/rblack $**

Your cursor is placed after the *prompt* characters, and the system waits fr
you t type something on that line. What you type is a *command* to the
operating system, usually the name of some program you want to run. If needed,
you add additional chunks of text, called *aparameters* that provide additional
information to the program. An example *command* might look like this:

..  code-block:: bash

    $ g++ -o hello.exe hello.cpp

..  note::

    I am going t use the Mac/Linux *prompt* format, shortened to just the
    single *prompt* character for the example in this course. You should look
    for the right prompt for your system. The example above is what you would
    type on a Windows system.

This example *command* names a program, **g++**, which is a *compiler* for a
C++ program.  Each chunk of text after that is a parameter that the program
needs. We will explore this in more detail later. For now, that is enough to
introduce working on the command line.

The File System
===============

All modern computers keep their files organized in a "tree" of directories,
subdirectories, and files.

..  note::

    It is called a "tree" because it looks like one if you drew it out.
    However, the "root" of this tree is usually at the top of the tree. Weird,
    but the image works.

The basic concept is found in any office setting. A piece of paper (a "file")
is placed in a "folder". That folder might be placed in another folder, and
ultimately in a filing cabinet. We give each gadget in this system a short
name. On Windows, the filing cabinet gets a letter, like "C". We define the
location of some file using the series of names separated by slashes. On
Windows, we use a back-slash, on Linux/Mac, we use a forward slash.

The complete set of names defining the location of some file is called the file
"path":

    * C:\folder1\folder2\filename

The top level in this system is often called the "root" folder -er- directory.

Linux/Mac systems do not use a disk drive letter. Instead a disk is "mounted"
at some location in this file system "tree", so we never have to think about
that. On these systems the top-most level is simple identified as "/".

The "Current Directory"
=======================

When you work on the command line, you are always working within some
"directory" on your file system. That directory is called the "current
directory"

Essentially, you are working with that folder open on your desk. You can see
the files in that folder, and the folders within that folder. To get into a
subfolder (or move up in the file system, you must "change directories".

    * cd subfolder - moves your current directory to this subfolder

    * cd .. - moves you up one level in the directory "tree"

On Mac and Linux, when you open up the terminal window, you are placed in your
"home directory":

    * /home/username - on Linux

    * /Users/username - on Mac

On the PC, you are placed in a system directory, which is not where you will
want to work.

    * C:\\Windows

There is a "home directory" on Windows, usually at:

    * C:\\users\\username


..  warning::

    Did you notice those slashes in those directory names? On Windows, you use
    the back slash, on any other system the forward slash. The slashes separate
    directory names from the files.

This complete string identifies exactly where on your system a particular file
is located.  You are actually navigating through a system of folders
(directories) and sub-folders in order to locate a particular file.  This can
go on as deep as you like, but the total sequence of names and slashes, called
the "path" is likely to get pretty long!

We will learn the commands that are needed to work on you system as we proceed.
For now, this is just an introduction. We need to set up our system before we
can get to work!

..  vim:ft=rst spell:

